---
layout: section
title: Amorphea
category: Phylogenetic classification
---
The great lineage Amorphea includes two large monophyletic supergroups, the **[Opisthokonta]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Opisthokonta.md %})** and the **[Amoebozoa]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Amoebozoa.md %})**, as well as many other lineages known by some species of unicellular organisms (Figure 82). Only molecular phylogenies make it possible to group together these organisms, because they do not show any obvious synapomorphy. In particular, the flagellar apparatus is very variable with organisms having two basal bodies and two anterior flagella like the majority of **[Amoebozoa]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Amoebozoa.md %})** and "minor" lineages, two basal bodies but a single flagellum positioned at the rear like the Opisthokonta, a basal body and flagellum in some **[Amoebozoa]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Amoebozoa.md %})** or without basal body and flagellum in most **[Eumycota]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Eumycota.md %})**, but also some protozoa living exclusively in amoeba form such as the [Nucleariida]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Holomycota.md %}). In addition to these main types, there are many derivations. We know for example genera of **[Eumycota]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Eumycota.md %})** like _Basidiobolus_ or _Coemansia_ possessing a remnant basal body, or at least what we interpret as such, because it does not contain 9 triplets of microtubules, but 11 or 12 unique microtubules; these fungi do not produce a flagellum. Most of the "minor" lines were previously classified with the **"[Excavata]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Excavata.md %})"**, with which they share the presence of a ventral groove involved in nutrition (Figure 83). Currently, they are grouped by some biologists in the Sulcozoa group, but this group with still fuzzy outlines is probably paraphyletic; the great divergence of the genomes of the minor lineages resulting in a taxonomic vagueness. It is possible that some of these organisms leave the Amorphea in the future. Conversely, more and more flagellates and amoebaes whose phylogenetic positions were uncertain appear to belong to the Amorphea.

Figure 83 shows some of the characteristic species of Sulcozoa. Most are flagellates with two flagella positioned in front of the cell, but one of which turns back. Some, like _Collodictyon_, have four flagella and others, like _Micronuclearia_, are amoebae with threadlike pseudopodia that emerge from the ventral groove. They are most often protected by a semi-rigid film affixed to the dorsal side. In biflagellate species, flagella are not used to swim but rather to glide on the substrate. These organisms are typical phagotrophs feeding on bacteria and algae via their ventral groove. Because of their interest in understanding the early stages of eukaryotic evolution, these organisms are currently the subject of intense research, in particular the Apusozoa, whose molecular phylogenies indicate that they are the closest relatives of the **[Opisthokonta]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Opisthokonta.md %})** (Figure 82). The genome of _Thecamonas trahens_ has been sequenced and the first analyzes suggest that it contains "integrin" proteins, involved in cell adhesion in animals, calcium and potassium channels also typical of animals, and type D cyclins found only among the Eumetazoa! The complete life cycles of these organisms are currently unknown because sexual reproduction has not been observed, but they are likely to be determined in the near future.
