---
layout: section
title: Basidiomycota
category: Phylogenetic classification
---
The branch of Basidiomycota, or Basidiomycetes, forms the second large phylum of Eumycota since it contains 30% of the species of described fungi. A shared trait of all Basidiomycota is the production of their meiospores by budding of specialized cells, the basidia. The spores are therefore called basidiospores (Figure 164). In addition, the majority of species has a dikaryotic mycelium originated from plasmogamy of sexually compatible cells. In the Ascomycota, only Taphrinomycetes presents such a mycelium, as the dikaryotic stage is non-existent among Saccharomycotina and restricted to within the fruiting body in Pezizomycotina.

The dikaryotic state is maintained according to the scheme shown in Figure 131. This mechanism produces a mycelium bearing a characteristic structure at the septa between the cells called a clamp connection (Figure 165). The observation of clamp connections is therefore a good diagnostic character to determine if a mycelium comes from a Basidiomycota, in addition to being dikaryotic. Nevertheless, all Basidiomycota do not produce clamp connections even at the dikaryotic stage, and absence of clamps is therefore not a good criterion for excluding such species from the phylum. Molecular phylogenies largely confirm the monophyly of the Basidiomycota and define three sub-branches: Pucciniomycotina, Ustilaginomycotina and Agaricomycotina (Figure 166).

**Pucciniomycotina**
The Pucciniomycotina, formerly Urediniomycetes, include ~7,500 described species. They are mostly obligate parasites of plants, especially gymnosperms and angiosperms, which appears to be the ancestral lifestyle of species in the group. Others live as saprotrophs or parasites of insects and mushrooms. Some species have adapted to aquatic life and are found in fresh or marine waters. Phytopathogenic species are often obligate biotrophs and can have life cycles that require two hosts and involve up to 5 different dispersal propagules! In many species the spores are numerous and reddish, hence the name "rust" given to these fungi. Some rusts cause considerable damage to crops, especially cereals. The septal pores of rust fungi are simple and sometimes have corpuscles resembling Woronin grains typical of Pezizomycotina (Figure 167). Few species form clamp connections in the mycelium. Some species produce simple, often small, multicellular fruiting bodies. Others have regressed to forms dividing essentially like yeasts. These often live in association with plants and in particular form the majority of the biomass of the phylloplane. Of the nine classes recognized in the subphylum, seven contain only a few described species. Of the last two classes, that of Pucciniomycetes is the most species rich and the most important in ecosystems and agriculture, while that of Microbotryomycetes is known from evolutionary biology studies which are carried out using some of its representatives, e.g. _Microbotryum violaceum_.

The class of Pucciniomycetes, and more particularly the order of Uredinales, encompasses 90% of the described species of Pucciniomycotina. They are obligate biotrophic plant pathogens attacking many hosts, ranging from trees such as pines to grasses and shrubs such as raspberries (Figure 168). The best known species is _Puccinia graminis_ which infects grains and causes black rust in wheat. Other wheat rusts are caused by _Puccinia striiformis_ for yellow rust and _Puccinia recondita_ for brown rust. In antiquity, these species caused such devastation that the Latins at the beginning of spring celebrated the "Robigalia", a festival to appease the god Robigus who was supposed to be responsible for the devastation to crops caused by _Puccinia graminis_. The life cycle of _Puccinia graminis_ is the most complex among eukaryotes because it involves two hosts and five forms of spores (Figure 169). Another order of Pucciniomycetes, comprising about 170 species, is that of the Septobasidiales. **They are parasites or cochineal mutualists. Indeed, if some species clearly behave like parasites vis-à-vis mealybugs, others form a structure that in its functioning resembles a lichen, except that the phycobiont is held by mealybugs! Their life cycle begins like _Puccinia graminis_ with a septate basidium which releases its basidiospores. These can bud from yeasts which generate colonies when cultured. When the spores / yeast come into contact with a mealybug, they generate a mycelium which will proliferate to form a thallus above a leaf or branch harboring mealybugs (Figure 170). The thallus contains chambers which house the animals. Part of the mealybugs is penetrated by suckers of the fungus. They are then sterile, smaller and bring food to the consortium by sucking the sap of the plant. The other mealybugs are free, fertile and ... protected by the thallus mycelial! On the upper surface of the thallus are produced the basidia. The multicellular thallus serves so also from fruiting. These associations can have a strong impact in agriculture. In effect, _Septobasidium pseudopedicellatum_ is a pathogen important of lemon trees in the southern United States, _Septobasidium bogoriense_ successfully attacks to coffee and _Septobasidium theae_ to tea.**

The class of Microbotryomycetes contains saprotrophic and parasitic species, notably parasites of plants such as Microbotryales. These parasites have a life cycle resembling that of the smuts (Ustilaginomycotina) with which they have long been classified (Figure 171). _Microbotryum violaceum_, the model species of the group, is able to infect a hundred Caryophyllaceae species where it attacks the anthers, resulting in a sexually transmitted disease (Figure 172). This disease is very common and infected **catchflies, campions or soapworts** can be frequently encountered. Fungi of the Microbotryales are used as models in genetics to understand the dynamics and evolution of fungal infections in plants, in addition to different modes of sex chromosome evolution.

**Ustilaginomycotina**
The subphylum Ustilaginomycotina includes about 1700 species, most of which are parasites of flowering plants. Most species infect a single host. Others, like _Malassezia_, colonize the skin of mammals, including humans, or feed on secretions from the sebaceous glands at hair follicles. Phytopathogenic species attack flowers and prevent seed formation, thereby having an important economic impact. Such species often alternate between an infectious mycelial phase and a saprotrophic yeast phase. They attack their host in a special way by secreting deposits inside plant cells via characteristic vesicles. At the end of infection, they often form clumps of black spores, giving them the common name "smut fungi". Their septal pores are more complex than in Pucciniomycotina (Figure 173). In several orders, this pore is not present and has probably disappeared by regressive evolution. Two classes have been defined on the basis of molecular data.

The Ustilaginomycetes class contains the best-known species of the subphylum, _Ustilago maydis_, which attacks maize and generates galls. The galls are effectively tumors where the host's tissue is enlarged and mixed with the mycelium, replacing kernels in the cob (Figure 174). The life cycle is very similar to that of _Microbotryum violaceum_, but the dispersal of teliospores is by wind and not by insects. In addition to its destructive aspect of crops, certain species or strains of _Ustilago_ can cause serious damage to human health. Consumption of parasitized corn by _Ustilago maydis_ is widespread in Mexico where galls are highly prized and sold under the name of Huitlacoche (Figure 175). Their ingestion may cause various ailments known as ustilaginism, especially in children. The fungus produces various toxins, alkaloids among others, some of which inhibit the action of adrenaline. It also causes abortions in cattle. The rest of the class have similar life cycles and infect many plants.

The class of Exobasidiomycetes also contains important pathogens, including _Tilletia caries_ which is a pathogen of wheat, causing decay. Its life cycle resembles that of _Ustilago maydis_. Young plants are infected in the spring and the infection is asymptomatic until harvest, where the grain is replaced by the powdery mass of spores. The spores have a longevity of at least 15 years in the soil. The life cycle of this fungus was determined by Isaac-Bénédict Prévost (1755-1819) at the beginning of the 19th century, who thereby showed for the first time, long before Robert Koch, that the cause of a disease was in fact a microbe. The _Malassezia_ are other important members of the class. These commensal yeasts in the skin can under certain ill-defined conditions proliferate and cause dermatitis including scalp dandruff or tinea versicolor.

**Agaricomycotina**
The subphylum of Agaricomycotina, formerly Hymenomycetes, can be considered as the counterpart of Pezizomycotina for the Basidiomycota, because it contains the majority of the described species, i.e. more than 20,000. It encompasses the majority of familiar fungi that produce large carpophores, which were used to establish the first classifications (Box 18). Some are edible such as button mushrooms, chanterelles, boletus, sheep's foot etc.; others are toxic such as fly agarics, galerinas etc. Some species with very similar appearances can be some edible and others very toxic or even fatal. The number of "specialists" having passed to the other side because of mushrooms is not counted any more. I urge you for more information to go see "Le Roman d'un Tricheur" by Sacha Guitry or listen to Mireille, Pills and Tabet in "Flowers and Mushrooms".

Agaricomycotina lifestyles are very varied. The majority of the species are saprotrophs involved in the recycling of wood and other plant materials. Some are very effective for the degradation of cellulose and lignin because they produce and export numerous enzymes (peroxidases, laccases, hydrolases, etc.) to the extracellular environment. A few species are lichens and many others live as mycorrhizal mutualists. Several Agaricomycotina are able to attack healthy or weak plants, in particular trees, and are therefore dangerous pests. Others are mycoparasites or animal parasites. One genus contains important human pathogens causing systemic mycosis mainly in immunocompromised patients. The septal pores are called "dolipores". They have a typical morphology with associated vesicles which derive from the endoplasmic reticulum (Figure 176). In section, they appear as a dotted parenthesis, hence their name parenthesome. In reality, it is a continuous cuff pierced with small pores. The number of pores varies in different classes. They are absent in species that diverged the earliest from the rest, e.g., Tremellomycetes, and numerous in other Agaricomycetes. The parenthesome contains characteristic proteins present only in Agaricomycotina. The dolipores are necessary for the proper functioning of the mycelium and for the development of fruiting. Indeed, the deletion of a gene encoding the spc33 protein in _Schizophyllum commune_ leads to a decrease in growth rate and a reduction in the production of carpophores. The mycelium of this mutant does not close its septal pores upon injury. The mycelium of Agaricomycotina, provided it contains functional dolipores, is capable, like that of Pezizomycotina, of supporting the production of complex multicellular fruiting bodies. However, unlike Pezizomycotina, dispersal by asexual spores appears to be less widespread. The generic life cycle of these fungi is presented in Figure 177. However, large variations exist around this cycle with different modalities for the production of basidia and basidiospores and especially for the development and morphology of the fruiting body (basidiocarp). The fruiting bodies can have the classic appearance of a "mushroom" but also appear as crusts, jellies, brackets, corals, wineskins, stars, phalluses or even bird nests! These forms are related to the mode of dispersion (Box 18).

Currently, the molecular phylogeny of Agaricomycotina defines four classes of varying importance. The first, that of the "Bartheletiomycetes", does not yet have the formal rank of class and contains only one species, _Bartheletia paradoxa_ (Figure 178). This fungus is a saprotroph that lives on the leaves of _Gingko biloba_. Gingkos are relics of a group of gymnosperms abundant in the secondary era. They are therefore considered "living fossils". Interestingly, _Bartheletia paradoxa_ presents, like its substrate, archaic characters, with the presence of micropores rather than a central pore in the septa between cells and "teliospores" which give rise to basidiospores, as in Pucciniomycotina and Ustilaginomycotina. It would thus seem that this species too is a "living fossil". The molecular phylogenies confirm its position at the base of Agaricomycotina, but do not allow us to decide whether this species defines a new class, or whether it is included in that of Tremellomycetes.

The class of Tremellomycetes mainly includes saprotrophs and parasites of other fungi. These Agaricomycotina always present archaic characters. The septal pores have unperforated or perforated parenthesomes but with cup-shaped vesicles. Some species produce teliospores. The basidia are in most species transversely septate (Figure 164, _Tremella mesenterica_). The haploid stage is yeast-like, similarly as in some Pucciniomycotina and Ustilaginomycotina. The sexual fusion of two compatible yeasts gives rise to a dikaryotic mycelium that differentiates an often gelatinous carpophore (Figure 179). The life cycle therefore resembles that of Ustilaginomycotina. Other species live mainly in the form of yeasts. This is the case of two human pathogens, _Cryptococcus neoformans_ and _Cryptococcus gattii_ that develop as capsulated budding yeasts (Figure 180). They are found naturally in soils, especially those rich in pigeon droppings or on certain trees such as eucalyptus. Their sexual reproduction requires a large amount of inositol, so these fungi only do so in nature on eucalyptus trees which contain a lot of it. Teleomorphs, called _Filobasidiella neoformans_ and _Filobasidiella bacillispora_, do not produce carpophores. These fungi are heterothallic with two mating types, MATa and MATα. When there is a nitrogen deficiency, two compatible cells merge. A curly dikaryotic hypha forms and gives rise at its tip to a holobasid, that is, an unseptate basidium. This basidium produces four basidiospores which immediately divide to give rise to yeast chains (Figure 180). In the laboratory, it is possible to induce a "monokaryotic" sexual cycle. In this case, the mycelium results from the fusion of two nuclei of the same mating type and gives diploid hyphae with incomplete clamp connections. Meiosis normally takes place in the basidium located at the end of the hyphae. In nature, only the mating type MATa is common. Cryptococci cause cryptococcosis. The infection is chronic and begins in the lungs after inhalation of infectious propagules. In immunocompetent subjects the lesions remain localized, but in immunocompromised patients, the fungus spreads with a predilection for the nervous system. Some antifungals, which lose their effect quickly because resistance develops during treatment, or the surgical removal of localized lesions can fight these parasites although they generally lead to death. Currently, there are 300 million cases annually, mainly in AIDS patients. Note that _Cryptococcus gattii_ can infect non-immunocompromised individuals and cause serious damage. An epidemic involving hundreds of patients recently took place in Vancouver, Canada. Many eucalyptus trees had been planted in the area around the city... _Cryptococcus_ are able to persist in the body to reappear later. In fact, they can persist inside macrophages for a long time. This is probably due to the fact that in their natural environment, they are the prey of amoeba. During evolution, they developed a strategy to escape their predator by inhibiting digestion by hydrolytic enzymes in the lysosome. The key elements of this escape are the establishment of a melanin coating and the presence of the glucuroxylomannan capsule. The same mechanisms are involved for persistence inside macrophages!

The class of Dacrymycetes contains about 100 species. They are common saproptrophes. They are characterized by their dolipore having the parenthesome pierced by a single central pore, in addition to their fork-shaped basidium with two peaks (Figure 164, _Calocera viscosa_). Their fruiting bodies are often brightly colored orange / yellow and exhibit the shapes of brains, cupules or corals (Figure 181).

The last class, that of Agaricomycetes, is the largest numerically since it includes more than 20,000 described species. Their life cycle, their perforated dolipore mycelium and their holobasids are typical of Agaricomycotina with a few exceptions such as certain Auriculariales which are the species that diverged the earliest. Agaricomycetes are mainly saprotrophs, in fact the most efficient in the living world to degrade lignocellulose, and mycorrhizal mutualists. Some species are pathogens attacking trees, such as _Armillaria_, _Heterobasidion annosum_ which parasitizes conifers, or _Moniliophthora perniciosa_ which attacks cocoa trees, or even lichens. Agaricomycetes are probably the most common fungi in the soil, although they are less often isolated in cultivation than Ascomycota or Mucoromycotina due to their slower growth than those of other Eumycota. They have diversified to a surprising extent and the strategies they have developed to disperse are multiple, resulting in fruiting bodies of widely varying shapes, sizes and colors (the fungi pictured in Box 18 are all Agaricomycetes).

The details of their complex classification are beyond the scope of this book. All the more so as their fruiting body morphologies were established via multiple evolutionary convergences, making it difficult to establish family links by simple analysis of the morphology of carpophores and spores. In addition, there are still many species that have not yet been analyzed and many lineages are yet to be discovered. Table 10 gives the main lines currently defined and the types of fruiting bodies they have established. It is easy to see from this table that the main types of carpophores have been invented by many lines! Detailed analysis of the results of the phylogenies indicates that the ancestral fruiting of the group would be of the "crust" type. Note that it is likely that species producing crusts that have yet to be analyzed, or even discovered, may be members of evolutionary lines additional to those indicated in the table, because such species have very similar morphologies and are often inconspicuous and therefore little studied.

Agaricomycetes are collectively very important in nature as they actively participate in soil formation. They ensure health because they manufacture humic acids which retain mineral salts; humic acids are degradation products of lignin. These fungi are also at the base of the food chain leading to small animals which participate in recycling plant waste. As mycorrhizals, they participate in the mineral nutrition of many plant species, especially trees in boreal regions. They also have an important role in the nutrition of "large animals", such as squirrels, wild boars and ... humans! In fact, the majority of “mushrooms” consumed (Figure 182) belong to this class, such as chanterelles, porcini mushrooms, trumpets of the dead, field mushrooms, button mushrooms, shiitake, oyster mushrooms, milk-caps, sheep's feet, ox tongues, wood blewits, etc. Some species, such as ink caps or _Schizophyllum commune_, are laboratory models for studying the development of fruiting, in particular the meiosis stage, or the structure and function of the mating type (figure 183). Others are analyzed for their content in genes which encode proteins capable of breaking down complex carbohydrates, because their enzymes have practical applications in paper bleaching or in the manufacture of biofuel from dead plant material.
