---
layout: chapter
title: The phylogenetic classification of eukaryotes
category: Phylogenetic classification
---
Molecular phylogenies (Figure 81) currently suggest grouping most eukaryotes into six monophyletic lineages: **[Opisthokonta]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Opisthokonta.md %})**, **[Amoebozoa]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Amoebozoa.md %})**, **[Archaeplastida]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Archaeplastida.md %})**, **[Stramenopila]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Stramenopila.md %})**, **[Alveolata]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Alveolata.md %})** and **[Rhizaria]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Rhizaria.md %})**, in addition to one group that is probably polyphyletic: the << **[Hacrobia]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Hacrobia.md %})** >>, and a last group whose status is in constant modification: the << **[Excavata]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Excavata.md %})** >>. The six monophyletic groups are well established and will probably not change more. However, it is very likely that Excavata disappears, because most of the species of this group have not been molecularly analyzed. Data already obtained suggest that this line is polyphyletic.

The eight eukaryotic major lineages seem to form three supergroups: the **[Amorphea]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Amorphea.md %})**, the **[Diaphoretickes]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Diaphoretickes.md %})** and the problematic "[Excavata]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Excavata.md %})". These three large clades contain species with highly diverse forms and functions making it is impossible to find synapomorphies for them. The term [Amorphea]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Amorphea.md %}) (= without form) also reflects this fact. It can be noted, however, that the endosymbiosis, primary, secondary, etc. of the plastids are produced exclusively by the [Diaphoretickes]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Diaphoretickes.md %}). Each of the five lines of this supergroup contains algae, but not exclusively.

Currently, the order of branching of the three supergroups is very uncertain. A molecular signature, the fusion of genes encoding the synthesis of thymidylate and the reduction of dihydrofolate, has been proposed to encapsulate the tree between the [Amorphea]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Amorphea.md %}) (or Unikonta), in which the genes are separated, and the other eukaryotes (or Bikonta), at which they are merged. This rooting allowed to separate the eukaryotes into two sets based on their mode of propulsion. However, this signature is now less clear because the two genes are fused in _Thecamonas trahens_, a flagellate clearly placed in [Amorphea]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Amorphea.md %}) by molecular phylogenies, probably as an old group of [Opisthokonta]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Opisthokonta.md %}). In fact, the term Unikonta has been abandoned because many species of [Amoebozoa]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Amoebozoa.md %}) have two flagella. Moreover, it seems that the merged form of the two genes, rather than two separate genes, would be the ancestral state. The tree would then be rooted in the [Excavata]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Excavata.md %}) and placing the other eukaryotes into two distinct lines. In fact, a part of them, the Malawimonadea and the Diphyllatea, are now grouped together with the [Amorphea]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Amorphea.md %}) (or Unikonta) in a line called "Opimoda" and another ensemble merged the [Discoba](/Microbial-eukaryotes/book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Excavata.html#discoba) and the [Diaphoretickes]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link book/Part2/phylogenetic_classification/sections/Diaphoretickes.md %}) under the name of "Diphoda". This rooting is perfectly compatible with the theory of phagotrophic origin of eukaryotes. The ancestral eukaryote would then, regarding morphology, be that of a small flagellate possessing two flagella and a ventral furrow by which it phagocytoses its prey. Its cellular body would also be able to deform to allow amoeboid movement.
