---
---
Two species of Saccharomycotina are very important to human societies, which has led to intensive study of their biology: _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ and _Candida albicans_.

_Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ has been cultivated by humans for over 9,000 years to make wine in Asia Minor, over 6,000 years to ferment beer in Babylon, and over 2,000 years to make bread in Egypt. It is found naturally in the sap secretions emitted by trees and on decaying fruit where it feeds on the present sugars. Nevertheless, the easiest way to harvest it is to visit the fermentation tanks of vineyards! _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ is found as a spheroidal uninuclear cell measuring about 20 microns. Its size is dependent on several factors: the strain, its ploidy, and the age of cell, because it divides by budding. Under certain conditions of stress, it exhibits growth with pseudo-hyphae and can sometimes be invasive. Generation time under good conditions is around 80 minutes. Its life cycle is haplodiplobiontic with two mating types referred to as mat a and mat α. Growth in the absence of oxygen results in the exclusive use of fermentation and most enzymes in respiration are then repressed. Fermentation is sufficient to ensure the survival of the cell, so _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ is a facultative aerobic organism. When the strains are grown under aerobic conditions in the presence of a high concentration of glucose, it begins by fermenting the sugars into ethanol. Then a change in metabolism, the dialsic transition, continues with the use of ethanol until its complete consumption, followed by entry into the stationary phase. It is this metabolism that is responsible for using yeast to make bread, wine, and beer.
